Pixel-perfect rendering with devicePixelContentBox (#3282)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/device-pixel-content-box/index.md

---
title: Pixel-perfect rendering with devicePixelContentBox
subhead: How many pixels are there _really_ in a canvas?
authors:
  - surma
date: 2020-06-24
updated: 2020-06-24
hero: pixels.jpg

> alt: Lots of pixels

Reviewer: ```suggestion
alt: A closeup image of a computer screen.
```

How do we go from this virtual display to the user's real display? Enter `devicePixelRatio`. This global value tells you how many _physical_ pixels you need to form a single CSS pixel. If `devicePixelRatio` (dPR) is `1`, you are working on a monitor with roughly 96DPI. If you have a retina screen, your dPR is probably `2`. On phones it is not uncommon to encounter higher (and weirder) dPR values like `2`, `3` or even `2.65`. It is essential to note that this value is _exact_, but doesn't let you derive the monitor's _actual_ DPI value. A dPR of `2` means that 1 CSS pixel will map to _exactly_ 2 physical pixels.

> **Example:** My monitor has a dPR of `1` according to Chrome. It has 3440 pixels in width and the display area is 79cm wide. That leads to a resolution of 110 DPI. Close to 96, but not quite. That is also the reason why a `<div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm">` will not exactly measure 1cm in size on most displays.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Details %}
  {% DetailsSummary %}
  Example

  My monitor has a dPR of `1` according to Chrome…
  {% endDetailsSummary %}
  It has 3440 pixels in width and the display area is 79cm wide.
  That leads to a resolution of 110 DPI. Close to 96, but not quite.
  That is also the reason why a `<div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm">`
  will not exactly measure 1cm in size on most displays.
{% endDetails %}
```

> Finally, dPR can also be affected by your browser's zoom feature. If you zoom in, the browser increases the reported dPR, causing everything to render bigger. If you check `devicePixelRatio` in the DevTools console while zooming, you can see fractional values appear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, dPR can also be affected by your browser's zoom feature. If you zoom in, the browser increases the reported dPR, causing everything to render bigger. If you check `devicePixelRatio` in a DevTools Console while zooming, you can see fractional values appear.
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="dprs.png" alt="" class="w-screenshot" width="600">

>   <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Dev Tools showing a variety of fractional <code>devicePixelRatio</code> due to the user using the browser's zoom function.</figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">DevTools showing a variety of fractional <code>devicePixelRatio</code> due to zooming.</figcaption>
```

To achieve something as close to a pixel-perfect canvas as possible on the web, this has been more or less the go-to approach:

```html
<style>
  /* … styles that affect the canvas' size … */
</style>
<canvas id="myCanvas"></canvas>
<script>
  const cvs = document.querySelector('#myCanvas');
  // Get the canvas' size in CSS pixels
  const rectangle = cvs.getBoundingClientRect();
  // Convert it to real pixels. Ish.
  cvs.width = rectangle.width * devicePixelRatio;
  cvs.height = rectangle.height * devicePixelRatio;
  // Start drawing…
</script>
```

The astute reader might be wondering what happens when dPR is not an integer value. That is a good question and exactly where the crux of this entire problem lies. In addition, if you specify an element's position or size using percentages, `vh`, or other indirect values, it is possible that they will resolve to fractional CSS pixel values. An element with `margin-left: 33%` can end up with a rectangle like this:

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="fractional-pixels.png" alt="" class="w-screenshot" width="600">

>   <figcaption class="w-figcaption">Dev Tools showing fractional pixel values as a result of a <code>getBoundingClientRect()</code> call.</figcaption>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">DevTools showing fractional pixel values as a result of a <code>getBoundingClientRect()</code> call.</figcaption>
```

</figure>

CSS pixels are purely virtual, so having fractions of a pixel is okay in theory, but how does the browser figure out the mapping to physical pixels? Because fractional _physical_ pixels are not a thing.

> ## Pixel Snapping

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Pixel snapping
```

The part of the unit conversion process that takes care of aligning elements with physical pixels is called "pixel snapping", and it does what it says on the tin: It snaps fractional pixel values to integer, physical pixel values. How exactly this happens is different from browser to browser. If we have an element with a width of `791.984px` on a display where dPR is 1, one browser might render the element at `792px` physical pixels, while another browser might render it at `791px`. That's just a single pixel off, but a single pixel can be detrimental to renderings that need to be pixel-perfect. This can lead to blurriness or even more visible artifacts like the [Moiré effect].

<figure class="w-figure">
  <img src="side-by-side.png" alt="" class="w-screenshot" width="600">
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">The top image is a raster of differently colored pixels. The bottom image is the same as above, but the width and height have been reduced by one pixel using bilinear scaling. The emerging pattern is called the Moiré effect.<br>(You might have to open this image in a new tab to see it without any scaling applied to it.)</figcaption>
</figure>

> ## devicePixelContentBox

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## `devicePixelContentBox`
```

> At this point, `devicePixelContentBox` should make a lot more sense to you. It gives you an element's content box in device pixel (i.e. physical pixel) units. It's part of `ResizeObserver`. While [ResizeObserver is now supported in all major browsers][ro support] since Safari 13.1, the `devicePixelContentBox` property is only in Chrome 84+ for now.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`devicePixelContentBox` gives you an element's content box in device pixel (i.e. physical pixel) units. It's part of `ResizeObserver`. While [ResizeObserver is now supported in all major browsers][ro support] since Safari 13.1, the `devicePixelContentBox` property is only in Chrome 84+ for now.
```

> As mentioned in [the main `ResizeObserver` article][resizeobserver], the `ResizeObserver`'s callback function will be called before paint and after layout. That means that the `entries` parameter to the callback will contain the sizes of all observed elements just before they are being painted. In the context of our canvas problem outlined above, we can use this opportunity to adjust the number of pixels on our canvas, ensuring that we end up with an exact one-to-one mapping between canvas pixels and physical pixels.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As mentioned in [`ResizeObserver`: it's like `document.onresize` for elements][resizeobserver], the callback function of a `ResizeObserver` will be called before paint and after layout. That means that the `entries` parameter to the callback will contain the sizes of all observed elements just before they are being painted. In the context of our canvas problem outlined above, we can use this opportunity to adjust the number of pixels on our canvas, ensuring that we end up with an exact one-to-one mapping between canvas pixels and physical pixels.
```

```js
const observer = new ResizeObserver((entries) => {
  const entry = entries.find((entry) => entry.target === canvas);
  canvas.width = entry.devicePixelContentBoxSize[0].inlineSize;
  canvas.height = entry.devicePixelContentBoxSize[0].blockSize;

  /* … render to canvas … */
});
observer.observe(canvas, {box: ['device-pixel-content-box']});
```

The `box` property in the options object for `observer.observe()` lets you define which sizes you wish to _observe_. So while each `ResizeObserverEntry` will always provide `borderBoxSize`, `contentBoxSize` and `devicePixelContentBoxSize` (provided the browser supports it), the callback will only be invoked if any of the _observed_ box metrics change.

> **Note:** All of the box metrics are arrays to allow `ResizeObserver` to handle fragmentation in the future. At the time of writing, the array is always of length 1.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Aside %}
All of the box metrics are arrays to allow `ResizeObserver` to handle fragmentation in the future. At the time of writing, the array is always of length 1.
{% endAside %}
```

> With this new property, we can even animate our canvas' size and position (effectively guaranteeing fractional pixel values), and not see any Moiré effects on the rendering. If you would like to see the Moiré effect on the approach using `getBoundingClientRect()`, and how the new `ResizeObserver` property allows you to avoid, take a look at the [demo] in Chrome Canary!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this new property, we can even animate our canvas' size and position (effectively guaranteeing fractional pixel values), and not see any Moiré effects on the rendering. If you would like to see the Moiré effect on the approach using `getBoundingClientRect()`, and how the new `ResizeObserver` property allows you to avoid it, take a look at the [demo] in Chrome 84 or later!
```

### Feature detection

> To check if a user's browser has support for `devicePixelContentBox`, we can observe any element, and check if the property is present on the ResizeObserverEntry:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To check if a user's browser has support for `devicePixelContentBox`, we can observe any element, and check if the property is present on the `ResizeObserverEntry`:
```

How do we go from this virtual display to the user's real display? Enter `devicePixelRatio`. This global value tells you how many _physical_ pixels you need to form a single CSS pixel. If `devicePixelRatio` (dPR) is `1`, you are working on a monitor with roughly 96DPI. If you have a retina screen, your dPR is probably `2`. On phones it is not uncommon to encounter higher (and weirder) dPR values like `2`, `3` or even `2.65`. It is essential to note that this value is _exact_, but doesn't let you derive the monitor's _actual_ DPI value. A dPR of `2` means that 1 CSS pixel will map to _exactly_ 2 physical pixels.

{% Details %}
{% DetailsSummary %}
Example

My monitor has a dPR of `1` according to Chrome…
{% endDetailsSummary %}
It has 3440 pixels in width and the display area is 79cm wide.
That leads to a resolution of 110 DPI. Close to 96, but not quite.

> That is also the reason why a `<div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm">`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is also the reason why a `&lt;div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm"&gt;`
```

> That is also the reason why a `&lt;div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm"&gt;`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
That is also the reason why a <code>&lt;div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm"&gt;</code>
```

> {% Details %}
>   {% DetailsSummary %}
>   Example
> 
>   My monitor has a dPR of `1` according to Chrome…
>   {% endDetailsSummary %}
>   It has 3440 pixels in width and the display area is 79cm wide.
>   That leads to a resolution of 110 DPI. Close to 96, but not quite.
>   That is also the reason why a `<div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm">`
>   will not exactly measure 1cm in size on most displays.
> {% endDetails %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Details %}
  {% DetailsSummary %}
  Example
  {% endDetailsSummary %}
  My monitor has a dPR of `1` according to Chrome.
  It has 3440 pixels in width and the display area is 79cm wide.
  That leads to a resolution of 110 DPI. Close to 96, but not quite.
  That is also the reason why a `<div style="width: 1cm; height: 1cm">`
  will not exactly measure 1cm in size on most displays.
{% endDetails %}
```
